>> Reporter: THE DOCUMENTARY
"ABACUS: SMALL ENOUGH TO JAIL"
TELLS THE STORY OF ABACUS
FEDERAL SAVINGS BANK, A SMALL
FAMILY-RUN BANK IN NEW YORK
CITY'S CHINATOWN.
IN THE WAKE OF THE 2008
FINANCIAL CRISIS, ABACUS BECAME
THE ONLY AMERICAN BANK TO FACE
CRIMINAL CHARGES FOR MORTGAGE
FRAUD.
FILMMAKER STEVE JAMES FOLLOWED
THE ABACUS CASE WHEN IT WENT TO
TRIAL.
HE'S BEST KNOWN FOR HIS GRITTY
CHICAGO DOCUMENTARIES INCLUDING"
HOOP DREAMS" AND "THE
INTERRUPTERS," AND "LIFE
ITSELF," ABOUT FILM CRITIC ROGER
EBERT.
IN THE CONTEXT OF THE MORTGAGE
CRISIS AND ALL THE BANKS THAT
WERE INVOLVED IN THAT CRISIS,
WHY DID YOU WANT TO TELL THIS
PARTICULAR STORY ABOUT THIS
BANK?
>> I THINK TO SOME EXTENT WE
WANTED TO TELL THIS STORY,
BECAUSE IT WASN'T REALLY BEING
TOLD AT ALL, UNLESS YOU READ THE
CHINESE-AMERICAN PRESS IN NEW
YORK CITY.
THEY ARE IN EVERY RESPECT SORT
OF THE MIRROR OPPOSITE OF THE
BIG BANKS IN 2008.
THEY WERE THE 2,651ST LARGEST
BANK IN THE UNITED STATES.
I THINK BECAUSE THEY WERE A
SMALL BANK THAT IT WASN'T
CONSIDERED IMPORTANT.
AND FOR ME, THAT MAKES IT HIGHLY
IMPORTANT TO TELL THE STORY.
>> Reporter: AT THE HEART OF THE
FILM IS BANK FOUNDER THOMAS SUNG
AND HIS TWO DAUGHTERS, VERA AND
JILL, WHO RAN ABACUS WITH HIM.
THE CASE AGAINST ABACUS BEGAN
AFTER THE SUNG FAMILY DISCOVERED
SOME LOAN OFFICERS HAD ALTERED
MORTGAGE APPLICATIONS TO
FRAUDULENTLY QUALIFY SOME
BORROWERS.
THE SUNG FAMILY ITSELF ALERTED
FINANCIAL REGULATORS.
>> THEY DISCOVERED THE FRAUD
THAT WAS GOING ON AMONG SOME
LOAN OFFICERS AND TOOK ACTION
IMMEDIATELY TO TRY TO ROOT IT
OUT.
INITIATED THEIR OWN INTERNAL
INVESTIGATION AND GOT RID OF
SOME MORE EMPLOYEES.
AND THEN WERE FULLY COOPERATING
WITH THE D.A.'S OFFICE BECAUSE
THEY THOUGHT THE D.A.'S OFFICE
WAS GOING TO ACTUALLY HELP THEM
TO ROOT OUT ANY ADDITIONAL FRAUD
THAT MIGHT BE GOING ON.
AND SO FOR THEM TO THEN TURN
AROUND AND BE INDICTED AND BE
ACCUSED OF ENDORSING AND MAYBE
EVEN DIRECTING THE FRAUD AT THE
HIGHEST LEVELS OF THE BANK WAS
JUST ASTOUNDING TO THEM.
BUT I MADE IT VERY CLEAR TO THE
SUNGS, IF WE'RE DOING THIS FILM,
WE'RE DOING THIS FILM, AND WE
WILL MAKE EVERY EFFORT TO
PRESENT THE CASE THAT'S AGAINST
YOU.
>> Reporter: THE FILM INTERVIEWS
SEVERAL JURORS FROM THE BANK'S
TRIAL AND LAYS OUT THE
PROSECUTION'S CASE AGAINST
ABACUS AND 19 FORMER EMPLOYEES.
>> IN ABACUS'S LOAN DEPARTMENT
MORTGAGES WERE BASED UPON FALSE
DOCUMENTATION.
WE HAVE EVIDENCE OF CONSPIRACY,
LARCENY, AND SYSTEMIC FRAUD.
>> Reporter: MANHATTAN DISTRICT
ATTORNEY CYRUS VANCE JR, DID NOT
GIVE THE SUNG FAMILY THE OPTION
TO REACH A CIVIL SETTLEMENT AND
JUST PAY A FINE, THE TYPE OF
DEAL OFFERED TO BIG BANKS WHO
SOLD TOXIC HOME LOAN PORTFOLIOS
TO INVESTORS.
>> I THINK EVERY AMERICAN WAS
UPSET AT THE CRISIS THAT WE WENT
THROUGH. THERE WAS BEHAVIOR THAT
WAS LESS THAN ETHICAL, AND I
THINK AMERICANS WERE UPSET THAT
THE SECURITY AGAINST WHICH LOANS
WERE MADE WERE OFTEN FICTITIOUS.
AND AT ABACUS THERE WAS SOME
TRUTH TO THAT, TOO.
IT'S CLEARLY NOT A BIG BANK, AND
CLEARLY IT'S NOT REPRESENTATIVE
OF THE ENTIRE FINANCIAL
COMMUNITY, BUT I THINK THE
PRINCIPLE WAS THE SAME.
>> Reporter: VANCE PROSECUTED
ABACUS EVEN THOUGH IT HAD ONE OF
THE LOWEST DEFAULT RATES IN THE
COUNTRY.
ONLY NINE OF THREE-THOUSAND
LOANS ABACUS GRANTED WERE NOT
PAID BACK DURING THE FIVE-YEAR
PERIOD COVERED BY THE FILM.
>> CYRUS VANCE JUST FELT THIS IS
EASIER TO ATTACK, ESPECIALLY
IT'S A FAMILY BANK.
BUT HE DOESN'T REALIZE THAT TOM
IS NOT EASY TO BE PUSHED AROUND.
AND MY GIRLS, THEY'RE TOUGH,
SMART CAPABLE WOMEN.
SO COURAGEOUS.
>> Reporter: CENTRAL TO THE FILM
IS THE CITY'S CHINESE-AMERICAN
COMMUNITY THAT WAS THE BANK'S
CUSTOMER BASE.
AS JILL SUNG EXPLAINS.
>> WE SERVE PEOPLE WHO HAVE
NEVER EVEN DEALT WITH THE
BANKING SYSTEM BEFORE AND YOU
TRY TO BRING THEM INTO THE
BANKING SYSTEM.
AN EXAMPLE OF THAT IS THE SAFE
DEPOSIT BOXES.
>> THERE ARE 8,000 PLUS BOXES IN
THIS VAULT.
8,000.
THE CHINESE PEOPLE, PARTICULARLY
THE IMMIGRANTS, THEY RENT HOUSES
IN VERY TIGHT QUARTERS, WITH NO
PLACE FOR THEM TO PUT THEIR
VALUABLES EXCEPT IN A BANK
VAULT.
>> ABACUS BANK SERVES MAINLY THE
CHINESE COMMUNITY IN NEW YORK
CITY, LARGELY FIRST-AND SECOND-
GENERATION IMMIGRANTS.
HOW CRITICAL WAS THAT TO THIS
STORY THAT YOU TELL ABOUT THEIR
INDICTMENT?
>> I THINK THAT WAS KEY.
THERE WAS A KIND OF PROFOUND
INSENSITIVITY TO THE WAYS IN
WHICH BANKING HAPPENS IN
IMMIGRANT COMMUNITIES, NOT JUST
CHINESE-AMERICAN, BUT EVEN
HISTORICALLY, ARE USUALLY LIVING
IN A CASH ECONOMY, ESPECIALLY IN
THOSE EARLY GENERATIONS.
THIS IS THE REALITY OF LIFE IN
AMERICA FOR THESE COMMUNITIES.
AND IN ORDER FOR THEM TO CLIMB
THEIR WAY UP THE LADDER, SO TO
SPEAK, AND GET MORTGAGES AND
START BUSINESSES, IT'S DONE
DIFFERENTLY.
AND THAT'S ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT ABACUS UNDERSTOOD AS A
BANKING INSTITUTION.
>> Reporter: THE SUNG FAMILY
SPENT $10-MILLION DOLLARS ON ITS
DEFENSE.
THE FILM SHOWS NOT ONLY THE
LEGAL STRUGGLE BUT ALSO THE
PERSONAL TOLL OF GOING TO TRIAL.
>> THEY MADE A DECISION THAT
THEY WERE NOT GOING TO PLEAD
GUILTY TO SOMETHING, THAT THEY
DID NOT FEEL THE BANK WAS NOT
GUILTY OF.
THAT IS A COURAGEOUS CHOICE AND
IT'S AN EXPENSIVE CHOICE.
IT IS A DAUNTING TASK TO FIGHT
THE GOVERNMENT.
>> IF THEY'RE FOUND GUILTY, IT
SURELY WOULD HAVE BEEN THE END
OF THE BANK.
PERSONALLY THOUGH, THE STAKES
WERE EVEN, I THINK, HIGHER FOR
THE FAMILY-- THIS BANK REALLY
REPRESENTED THEM.
IT WAS THEIR LEGACY.
WE ARE WITH THE SUNGS DURING
THIS ORDEAL.
AND YOU GET AN UP-CLOSE AND VERY
PERSONAL LOOK AT THE STRESS AND
STRAIN AND THE CLOSENESS AND THE
BICKERING THAT GOES ON AS THEY
FACE THIS.
THE SUNGS ARE JUST THIS SORT OF
WONDERFULLY CLOSE AND VERY FUNNY
FAMILY IN A LOT OF WAYS.
AND THEY NEVER KIND OF LOST
THEIR SENSE OF HUMOR EVEN AT
TIMES IN THE MIDST OF THIS.
>> Reporter: WHAT DO YOU HOPE
THAT PEOPLE TAKE AWAY FROM THIS
FILM?
>> I THINK IT'S A FILM ABOUT A
COMMUNITY THAT IS NOT KNOWN TO
STAND UP FOR THEMSELVES IN THIS
COUNTRY.
THAT HISTORICALLY, PERHAPS
BECAUSE OF HAVING COME FROM
MAINLAND CHINA AND MORE OF A
POLICE STATE, THEY HAVE DONE
EVERYTHING THEY CAN TO AVOID ANY
SCRUTINY OR ANY INVOLVEMENT OR
ENGAGEMENT WITH THE POWERS THAT
BE.
AND THIS IS A CASE WHERE THIS
FAMILY SAID, "NO, WE ARE GOING
TO FIGHT BACK."
FOR THEIR COMMUNITY AND THEIR
BANK THAT IS A PILLAR WITHIN
THAT COMMUNITY.